[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, we can't go
too long without talking about the role
of the dollar in the United States, the
pillar of the global financial system,
whether there is some threat to it or
not. We are recording this July 17th. It
has been a fresh week of headlines about
say independence of the Federal Reserve
and all of the things that we talk about
all of the time. So, we sort of need to
return to this central question.
>> Yeah. The interesting thing about the
Fed chair drama is when the initial
headlines came out about Trump possibly
firing Pal, the big reaction wasn't the
dollar, right? It wasn't in markets. It
wasn't even bonds. It was the currency.
>> Totally. And I think this is one of
those things where
>> I don't know. We don't know what's going
to happen, whether Trump will actually
try to find cause to fire Powell. Who
knows what will even happen by the time
people are listening to this episode.
But you know I think people get the
sense that with the Fed here with many
other thing there is this sort of like
erosion of an existing set of norms or
expectations etc. And so you know I
think arguably some damage for better or
worse has already been done to the
existing institutional arrangement.
Everyone around the world is paying
attention not to mention the sort of
arbitrariness or volatility of tariff
policy ongoing wars and so forth. Much
is in change. We live in interesting
times.
>> Here's what I think.
>> Go on.
>> So, it's a cliche in financial market
commentary to talk about a major turning
point, right? Because we've seen people
talk about the death of the dollar for
decades. Yeah. Exactly. But that said, I
think what's different about now is the
number of like long-term secular trends
that appear to be reversing
>> on the move.
>> Yeah. So, you know, there's
globalization going from
deglobalization. There's population
growth going to shrinking populations.
There's higher inflation instead of
years and years of deflation.
>> And the interesting thing about that is,
of course, how are people going to react
to that? How are markets going to react
to that? Especially when they've grown
very, very used to the previous
situation through, you know, back
testing and all of that stuff.
>> Totally. And I'll just say one thing
which makes this very interesting timing
wise from the perspective of investors
because there is a lot there are a lot
of trends that seem to be if not going
in reverse at least a new direction etc.
One trend that hasn't got really gone in
reverse however is you are still getting
paid a lot to own US tech and you know
US markets they're up solidly on the
year they are underperforming which is
that is new global equities have
outperformed US equities in large part
this year but this basic idea that where
all the money to be made is as an
investor is still in like a handful of
US companies like that in a way
surprisingly is still kind of intact and
The question is, will that be like the
last sort of the shoe to drop or the end
of US exceptionalism from just the
perspective of a globally oriented
portfolio manager?
>> I think that's a good thing to watch.
I'm going to pull a page out of Bob
Brackett's Commodities Energy Transition
book and say that these types of
transitions often take longer than
people expect. You shouldn't expect
everything to happen all at once. It's
going to happen in stages. So, there's a
lot to look out for, a lot to discuss.
Well, I'm really excited to say we have
the perfect guest, someone we haven't
spoken to in uh several years, but
always one of the most interesting guys
around. We're going to be speaking with
Inigo Frasier Jenkins. He is a market
strategist at Alliance Bernstein. He has
recently published a new quote book
that's public online about the sort of
like the big trends of the year
including a big focus on the sort of
like question about the stability of the
dollar or a postdoll universe and what
that could look like. So Inigo, thank
you so much for uh coming back on
OddLots.
>> Thank you very much. Be good to be back
on the show.
>> Tell me about your books. What are your
books and what is the theme of this
year's book? Yeah. So the book is a way
of drawing together in one place some of
the views we have on some of the biggest
questions that investors face. So
exactly some of the issues that you've
mentioned already in terms of
globalization turning into
deglobalization of population growth
turning into a slowdown in working age
population and issues around interest
rates and inflation being different from
the norms of the last 30 or so years.
And all these issues sit in the
background. We think there's a strong
case to be made that some of the norms
of the last 30 or 40 years really are
unwinding and either run their course or
going into reverse. And then one of the
particular issues that has really
dominated the client conversations that
we've had the last 3 to 6 months has
been this question you've been talking
about in terms of US exceptionalism. Has
it ended? Does the dollar change in
terms of its role as a reserve currency?
Is the prognosis the dollar the same as
prognosis for US equities or are these
just different things? And if these kind
of questions do we really want to kind
of get to grips with and offer some
views what investors can do about them?
>> What kind of time frame are you looking
at here? Because I think we often don't
talk enough about time frames and
reading some of the book some of it I
found, you know, a little bit worrying,
a little bit depressing because you're
talking about all these long-term
challenges that the entire world
basically faces. And so I'm thinking
like what is the time frame here? Is it
on a long enough time frame we're all
going to be dead anyway or is it the
next 20 or 30 years?
>> I think the interesting thing is there
are a bunch of different forces acting
at the same time on markets. Now all
these are strategic forces but the ones
I'm talking about in the book that is
and so they can be thought about as
acting over a say 5 to 10 year time
frame and of course anything that
involves a conversation on demographics
occasion people just kind of close their
ears because they think well it's so
slow moving that surely that's not going
to matter but actually if it's happening
in conjunction with other things then
there is an argument that that strategic
horizon perhaps isn't quite so far off
as people thought and when that view on
delization for example is tied with
concerns around debt levels is concerned
around the shift from globalization and
deglobalization. These are things that
have suddenly zoomed up the list of
concerns that investors have. And so I'd
argue that although one might have
thought that these are issues that were
sort of further off in some sort of
notional strategic future that in fact
what we've seen in the last 6 months or
so is those longerterm issues become
things that dominate the near term. And
so that's a longerterm future has become
issues that few people are facing. out
>> just on the demographics point you
mentioned that a lot of you you hear
that word as okay this slowmoving trend
it is actually though staggering the
numbers when you look at so you know
obviously people talk about the
population trajectories in China aging
in the west but even like I saw these
charts of Latin American population
growth like fertility is collapsing
everywhere I mean it's really
extraordinary and it's it's not
happening slowly
>> yes so the changes uh certainly
happening very rapidly uh in terms of
the context of past changes we've seen
and I think that people just need to be
aware of just the scale of the support
the demographics has given to growth
rates over the last 30 or 40 years.
We've seen this extraordinary period
when there's been globalization that's
brought extra workers into the sort of
same environment in terms of the
economic um arena that they work in. and
you've had a large kind of cohort of
people who've all been in the workforce
and you've had an increase in the female
participation ratio at the same time and
so you've had a series of things that
have meant that there have been many
more workers available and I'd argue
that even before you're going to get
into the issue around deglobalization
that demographic shift alone undoes a
very large part of this increase in the
global worker pool that we've seen
through the process of globalization
since the 80s. Now people can you know
can get very negative about this but you
know it isn't an outlook that implies a
bearish way of prognosis for the future
but it certainly changes the base case
of where you think kind of growth lies.
So for example, if you look at the sort
of prognosis from here onwards, we have
an outlook of the next sort of 10 to 15
years where on the UN population data at
least that the US working age population
is still going to grow but it's going to
grow much more slowly than people have
been used to in the last kind of 30
years. It'll grow at about 2% peranom
but in Europe the working age population
is going to shrink at about half%
peranom. In China it's really going to
shrink quickly at about 1% peranom
between now and 2050. So yes, I mean
other forces are happening in parallel
with this kind of clearly, but you know
as a base level effect that does change
one's view on what growth rates look
like. No, but but in that context that
yes, from an absolute perspective that's
telling us growth slows down. But back
to the other thread that you started
this podcast with in terms of the US
exception point, although growth is
slowing in the US, the base assumption
that we have and the most forecasters
have is the working age population does
still grow ever so slightly. And that is
a better prognosis than say in Europe,
in Japan, in China where it's shrinking
outright.
>> Can I ask about government debt because
this is the other thing that you know
people have been talking about for a
very very long time. High deficits
especially in the developed world. I
think the highest level of debt since
like World War II, something like that.
How do you reconcile I guess the
warnings over debtdriven instability or
impact on economic growth with the fact
that investors keep for the most part
buying government bonds? I know after
April 2nd we did see a spike in like
10-year Treasury rates, but it came down
a bit after that. It's actually pretty
close to where it was in early April
now, but it does seem like there is
broadly continued appetite for debt. So
when would that actually become a
concern for investors?
>> I keep being asked this question by
investors in recent
question and really for the last year or
so. So yeah, you're right in saying that
the level of net debt to GDP is the same
as it was in World War II. I guess the
first thing to say about that is not
just a US problem. That's actually a
G7wide problem. So G7 debt in terms of
net debt to GDP is back to where it was
at the end of World War II. Now of
course it's been getting there for some
time. It's been rising really kind of 30
years and that hasn't mattered in an
environment of falling interest rates.
But if there has been a definitive turn
in the interest rate cycle, then that
obviously starts to become a problem.
People like to fret about these debt
levels and certainly you know other
things equal. It implies that sovereign
issuers including the US are more risky
than they were before. And so you could
say well maybe there should be a pricing
of sovereign risk and a should be a
steeper yield curve. The problem is that
so far those fears have been utterly
swamped by the demands that investors
have for liquid assets and safer liquid
assets. So you have seen attempts to
price sovereign risk. Yes. arguably in
April in the US, a couple years ago in
the UK around uh the LDI crisis prior to
the last French election. You get these
sort of episodes where the market tries
to price sovereign risk, but it's very
hard to know, you know, at what point
that becomes a problem because this is a
can that obviously can be kicked down
the road a long way. There was a
fascinating paper published by Nile
Ferguson earlier this year where he made
the argument that basically it's not net
debt to GDP that really matters. It's
the relative size of the debt service
cost compared to the defense budget. And
the reason that seems like a relevant
thing to talk about is last year was the
first year where the US service cost on
debt exceeded the US defense budget. And
then he goes back and looked at previous
examples of great powers that have seen
this kind of crossover take place and
bad things happen. And whether that is
the example of the UK or the Ottoman
Empire or the Hapsburgs, you know, a
whole series of historical episodes have
led to great powers no longer being able
to project hard power if the debt
service cost is much larger than the
defense budget. Now the interesting
example that I guess is vaguely relevant
from that is most relevant is the UK. In
1920, the debt service cost became much
greater than defense budget. That had a
big impact on the ability to project
hard power. Now what's interesting is
the UK managed to reverse course and
actually end up with a defense budget
again larger than interest service cost
and debt but it did so through inflation
depreciation and through the loss of
reserve currency status which I guess is
the kind of key thing that makes it
relevant today. So I guess to conclude
in terms of of how one thinks about
this, you know, I think the sovereign
risk is something that perhaps should be
priced given the massive uncertainty
about you know how that risk is
perceived in the market versus demand
for liquidity. I think one's just left
with a a kind of directional answer
saying well yes at some point the yield
curve should steepen but is very very
hard to make a tactical kind of call
around that. I I think perhaps a more
pertinent way for investors to actually
think about that in practical terms is
that it means that the dollar is less of
a safe haven asset but than it was
before. And that's the key point really.
It's not so much
>> in terms of coming up with a particular
return forecast on the dollar being
different from where it was say 6 months
ago. I think it's become almost
consensus across the street that people
are now more negative on the dollar than
they were say 6 months ago. But I guess
what's interesting is the riskiness of
it and the idea that risk the dollar are
now more correlated with the risks to
other risk assets. And so that implies a
different approach the way people should
form portfolios.
>> Okay, let's get into this because I
think this is the really important point
which is that people talk about some
sort of you know risks to the dollar
risks to the dollar status and so I want
to talk about more like setting aside
timing. Maybe it's fast, maybe it's
slow, maybe it's medium-term. What are
the data points that you would look at
to say something is happening? Is it
dollar levels against other currencies?
Is it dollar share of transactions? Is a
dollar share of sovereign savings? Or is
it, and it seems like where you're going
with this, is it the relationship,
whether it's inverse or positive, to
risky assets? what are these sort of
like fingerprints of what it would look
like when it's like oh something has
meaningfully changed about the way
people view the dollar in their
portfolios. So I guess I first of all
kind of pick up in terms of the
relationship with dollar and other
assets. And so you've seen just the last
few months episodes when the a dollar
has declined at same times that bond
yields have gone up. I is a more risky
environment and the dollar hasn't
behaved in a safe haven asset in that
kind of environment. You've also seen a
more deeply negative correlation between
dollar and gold. Obviously priced in
dollars that implies that the dollar is
seen as less of a safe haven asset. And
you've seen an increased correlation
between assets such as gold, silver,
platinum, and Bitcoin. All things which
are plausibly possible non-fear zero
duration assets that you know that
through a certain lens share certain
characteristics anyway. So you've seen
this market behavior where more dollar
risk has been priced. At least there
have been episodes of that. What I think
would really change this though and make
it more of an immediate concern for
people is if there were large flows out
of US bonds from institutional
investors. Now there's been a lot of
talk about this. There's been a lot of
coverage of it. I've been asked about it
in many many meetings. But so far as far
as we can tell that is much more talk
than actual flow. I mean there have been
episodes for example where the Japanese
pension system or elements of European
pensions have been selling dollar bonds
but the numbers are very small in the
scheme of things. So so far what you're
still seeing is a demand for safer
liquid assets uh is still the dominant
yeah forces but that's the thing that we
really look for for a change. I mean I
think one thing in the background here
is one has to bear in mind there are
some very different kinds of risks here
that are all being conflated and they
point in the same direction but they
come from I guess very different basis.
So one is the concern around fiscal
sustainability as we discussed. So that
yes it's certainly a concern but you
never know what the timing of that's
going to be. Separate from that is a
more geopolitical imperative which is
the need for countries which are rivals
to the US to try and deolarize in some
way. Now the problem is there is no
viable alternatives. That means that the
flow into other alternatives is going to
be slow. We obviously seen this in the
increased bidding by central banks for
gold and I think it's and I think that
could spread to other kind of assets as
well. But that's a sort of
non-marketdriven
more geopolitical concern that can carry
on. And then you have specific investor
concerns, you know, when there have been
suggestions from the US administration
that perhaps we can apply some kind of
taxes or charges on foreign holders of
US assets and that has certainly grabbed
attention but and people have backed
away from that. So it doesn't seem to be
an immediate concern right now. But
three very different things pointing the
same direction which is for there to be
somewhat less trust in the dollar as a
safe haven. The biggest thing in its
favor though is that growth in the US
seems likely to be stronger than growth
in other regions and the lack of another
alternative means the outflows are going
to be slow. I think so this is a drip
freed story that sits in the background
I think we have for many years to come
[Music]
>> can I tell a story
>> please
>> I swear it's relevant to this
conversation but you've probably heard
this story before actually Joe one of
the best convers conversations I ever
listened to was between Howard Marx and
Mike Milin at the Milin conference in LA
and it was basically about how the
investment landscape had kind of changed
over their careers. So in the 1950s and
1960s if you put your money in blue chip
stocks like the Nifty50 or something
like that, everything was fine and you
made consistent profit. But then the
market crashed in the early 1970s and
you had high inflation and that kind of
changed everything. So higher volatility
along with higher inflation and a
deterioration in real purchasing power
which meant people lost like 90% of
their money at that time which is crazy.
And Mike and Howard's argument was that
this was what caused the explosion of
money managers and also the birth of the
high yield bond market because people
realized well you can't just buy
Polaroid stock anymore and expect a
consistent return. you have to be more
sophisticated about it and measure risk
against that return. So I guess my
question is are we talking about
something similar here in terms of a C
shift in investor behavior? So maybe
instead of weighing risk against return,
you weigh risk against real returns or
something like that. I think that's a
strong narrative that will carry on for
a long time because people have been
very used to an environment where for
decades and decades inflation has been
benign. It's been relatively low
volatility of inflation and inflation's
been going down. At the same time, we've
seen strong returns both from equities
and from fixed income assets over most
of the time. And um equities and fixed
income have managed to have a negative
correlation there between them. And so
the overall return versus risk that
you've achieved in real terms has been
very strong. Now I'm absolutely not
suggesting that we face a bearish
outlook, but I think we do face a harder
outlook. an outlook where there are
multiple structural forces that imply
the level of inflation will be somewhat
higher and somewhat more volatile. Given
the constraints on growth that we spoke
about in terms of demographics etc.
Given where we are in terms of the
valuations across most asset classes
being high, the likelihood is that the
real return achieved from the portfolios
that have done well for many decades is
going to be much much lower. And so it
raises this really fundamental question
which is actually what is the objective
of most investors. You know is the
objective to maximize return per unit
risk or is it to preserve real returns
or another way of thinking about it is
what is the definition of risk that's
ultimately relevant here? I mean is risk
the expected volatility of my portfolio
over the next 10 years or is risk the
risk of a loss of purchasing power over
the next 10 years? And I would suggest
that for nearly every investor if they
think about it ultimately it's the
latter of those two that's a much bigger
issue.
>> Wait why not both?
>> I mean ideally one would care about
both. It depends how many degrees of
freedom you think you have because you
know unfortunately if the expected real
return across assets is going to be
generally lower. If the correlation
amongst them is generally higher then
ekking out a certain level of real
return becomes much much harder. So I
think actually there ends up being a
direct tension between the measure risk
as um expected volume of the portfolio
versus preserving purchasing power
because if the thing that really matters
to you in the long run is preserving
purchasing power I would argue that
actually you probably have to take more
risk in the sense of expected V
>> and even though I'm aware that's a
horrible thing to have to explain to
people and it might sound very cavalier
at a point when the ship is 35 times and
I'm not spelling uh particularly you
become bullish a long-term outlook but I
think you'll have no choice you have to
think about taking more risk because the
other you know option is to underperform
inflation and that is more painful for
people
>> I mean the good news at least in that is
that people can choose how they want to
take that risk how they want to
partition it what kind of risks do they
believe in what risks are consistent
with the liquidity that they need and
the time horizons they have and the
beliefs they have etc etc but in this
tension between the two different kinds
of risk I think is that need to preserve
we purchasing power that is the real
focus and that is a a shift in
governance ultimately for many investor
types. So you know looking at your big
themes this year and thinking about this
idea of a sort of a world where the
dollar is less important or less
dominant or less safe or something like
that. One of the things that you mention
is geopolitics and of course there are
multiple wars going on. There is the
weaponization of the dollar. Of course,
Russia was on the the other end of after
its invasion of Ukraine. But what about
politics? I mean, we always talk about
geopolitics, but I'm also interested in
like actual politics and what's going on
in the United States right now, the
attacks on Federal Reserve independence.
That's not geopolitics. That's politics.
But it could shake people's faith in the
dollar system. other, you know, shackles
like that that the government has put on
itself to maintain some sort of
stability or even just sort of the
volatility in trade policy or the fact
that the government, you know, passed
another gigantic tax cut. There's no
political appetite for meaningful change
in the debt trajectory. How does like
politics, domestic politics play into
global perceptions of dollar stability?
>> I think there are two avenues here. I
guess one avenue again is back to this
topic of fiscal sustainability. And if
there is no appetite across parties to
really meaningfully change that fiscal
kind of trajectory, then one is left
with this you know kind of question of
how sustainable is the debt? Can this
can be kicked down the road? But what
are the ways out? And I and ultimately I
think that inflation is the most likely
route out. I think you have to be hugely
optimistic about the growth that can
come from AI in order to have a view
that there's an alternative way out. And
the second I guess is this question of
trust in the US from the point of
overseas investors. There certainly
there have been points where that's been
shaken. So I was doing a series of
marketing tours around global clients at
the point where all those discussions
was taking place about should there be
some kind of Mara Laga accord and
potentially changing the status of
foreign owners of US debt and okay it
looks like that's been backed away from
as suggestion and certainly hasn't come
up in meetings for a long time so maybe
that's not going to happen but just the
fact it was raised you know at the same
time that there is this concern about
fiscal sustainability and there are
geopolitical political forces which are
very strong to try and find dollar
alternatives and that I guess sort of
feeds this kind of view that that
perhaps the dollar has less of a safe
haven status than it did before. I mean
the big caveat is it depends what kind
of risk we're talking about here. I
think if we're talking about general
business cycle risks then people you
know I think generally do take the view
now compared to say a year ago that the
dollar is more risky. When things get
really bad when there's a geopolitical
shock often you know quite short-term in
nature thankfully then you still see
people flee to the dollar and the dollar
rally in the short term over potentially
large shocks. Since we're talking risk
premiums and political or geopolitical
instability, one thing I wonder is we're
basically talking about how the world is
changing and norms are shifting. And I'm
kind of wondering could the norms or
could the response from investors change
in a more unexpected way in the sense
that instead of seeing risk premiums go
up because everyone is nervous about
instability or big shocks or whatever
maybe everyone just becomes really used
to it and you don't see higher risk
premiums priced in. I mean that's a
consistent theme in market right?
something major happens and then
something similar happens later and you
don't get as big a reaction. Is that a
possibility here?
>> I mean I think it's a possibility. I
mean I e I'm not sure that's enough to
turn one super bullish uh in terms of
long run
again I you know but just to stress you
know I do think that the US market and
global equities are going to produce
weird positive real return but
valuations today are high. So I would
argue that you know that yes one can
outline a narrative that there does not
need to be a shift back to structurally
lower levels of valuation because of
where we are in real rates because where
we are in terms of the persistence of
profitability for some of the most
profitable firms. I mean all these
things justify valuations where they are
but to justify a shift upward in
valuations which I think is what you're
kind of getting to been your question I
think that would just be really tough.
So yes, I can get to a positive return
outlook, but yes, that's driven by views
on where real earnings go, not by
multiple expansion. I think that would
be a hard call to make.
>> Joe has a complicated relationship with
gold, but when we're talking about real
purchasing power, what exactly are you
advising people to buy to or hedge to to
preserve that purchasing power?
>> Yeah. So there's a broad range of
responses and it's not as simple I guess
in future thing as perhaps with
hindsight it was over years when both
bonds and equities produce positive real
returns and had a negative correlation
between them. I mean think of real
assets for me number one is global
equities. I mean as long as inflation's
only moderately higher and not much
higher then there is strong evidence
that equities behave like a real asset
and produce real returns and that's a
liquid asset class. So that comes number
one. Alongside that there are a range
you know of other real assets as well be
it real physical assets or be it areas
of private assets for example kind of
private debt that has a floating rate
nature attached to it can be in real
assets in the form of real estate
farmland etc and things like that and
then there's gold so gold has a long run
real return of the last 200 years of
plus 0.2% 2% peranom as far as we can
tell. So it's very small number.
Although maybe one should, you know, say
that if you're buying it because you're
frightened of some a really riskoff
event, then a zero real return may not
be such a bad thing.
>> There's a value in getting a good
night's sleep. That's something that
I've kind of learned like investors are
willing to pay to have that sort of end
of the world hedge.
>> Yes. Although the risk of course is the
lost opportunity that becomes because in
the last kind of 30 years obvious that
would be an appalling call.
>> Yeah. I lose sleep because other people
are getting richer than I am. So you
know there are all kinds of reasons to
lose sleep.
>> Yeah. Although in the last kind of
couple years obviously girls actually
>> Yeah. totally and then I lose sleep over
that too. I just don't sleep well. I
think the key argument in favor of gold
and we've been pro a gold allocation in
the advice we give to clients for some
years but I think the key argument in
favor of it is that look yes you want a
big overweight on equity strategically
even if it's not that bullish outlook
but just because that gives you a
positive real return. The question is
what do you add around that equity
position that helps diversify risk in
the portfolio because the problem is
that if inflation does remain higher and
perhaps more volatile then bonds are not
going to diversify equity risk as they
have in the past. The key attraction of
gold is that the correlation of gold and
equities remains at zero at different
inflation levels. So it does seem to
have an established track record as
being a diversifier risk of equity risk
that is in higher inflation episodes and
that's its kind of key role in
portfolios. Then I mean on top of that
we can also take the view that for
geopolitical reasons and nonprofit
driven reasons central banks will carry
on buying it and that might give upward
support but I'm not going to attempt to
give a number or forecast on that
because that's simply too hard to do.
[Music]
One of the bigger structural trends you
talk about in this more volatile future
world or potentially more inflationary
future world is a climate risk. And I
have to say that over the last several
years I've come to roll my eyes a little
bit when I see financial institutions
talk about climate. Sometimes it feels
prefuncter. We've seen
>> performative
>> performative. Sometimes in the last
couple of years and again this is not on
the research side. This is not on the
investing side but on the last couple of
years suddenly banks losing their
interest in in climate period etc. like
suddenly these client all this talk that
executives love to talk about on panels
in the mid2010s suddenly they don't say
it anymore but I so I thought it was
actually interesting that here in 2025
and you're still talking about climate
net zero being unrealistic in your view
from a social perspective temperatures
expected to continue to rise talk to us
about like why I shouldn't be cynical
about when I see financial institutions
talk about climate and why it should
actually be you know one of the key
pillars of risk going forward
Yes. So our view is very kind of
specific on this which is we want to
think about what are the big structural
forces that act on markets over a 5 10
year horizon and what are things that
really affect the fundamental risks that
investors face. So in conjunction with
these other forces happening at the same
time in terms of demographic shifts and
AI and worries about debt and
deglobalization, we also have I think a
need to think about whether there are
risks associated with climate. And the
specific view that we have on that is
that it seems highly unlikely that the
world will achieve net zero by 2050 for
two different kinds of reasons. One is
that it's socially and politically
really hard to change behaviors fast
enough. Secondly is the power demand of
AI. So you know so as far as we can tell
by the end of next year global data
center power demand will be the same
power demand as the total power of
Japan. So we basically added a G3
economy onto global power demand and
that will continue to grow. So that
implies that we don't hit net zero. The
climate science seems to suggest that
means that it's likely we see a warming
greater than 2°. And then the question
is well do investors need to care about
this? Does this matter either from the
point of view of inflation, inflation
risk, supply chain risk or growth rates?
So in our book, we spend a lot of time
so pooling academic evidence on what the
effect is of a change in temperature on
GDP. Now the first thing to say is you
plot the 28 studies that we looked at in
terms of the link between temperature
and growth. They're all over the place.
It's a big bunch of points. So the first
thing to say about it is there's huge
disagreement about what the relationship
between temperature and growth is but
the trend line through it if you simply
put a sort of average line kind of
through it is downwards. So yes we can
argue about how material it is but there
is a link that seems to be the consensus
across the academic work that we looked
at that you know at the margin a bigger
increase in temperature is bad for
growth. Again the question is you know
how does this matter and how do people
kind of think about it and what's the
scale of this because the average of all
those you know implies a change in the
equity outlook 10 years forward that
just simply shaves 2% peranom off the
global equity outlooks that might not
sound like a very big deal you know it's
certainly smaller than the impact of
demographic change or mean reversion on
an equity forecast having said that the
more recent forecasts are worse than the
older forecast and imply something that
looks like a minus.5 or minus.6% 6%
peranom impact on equity returns at the
10-year mark. And that starts to get to
be the same kind of order of magnitude
as demographics has on the average
return that one should expect. But I'd
argue that we go beyond that because the
real thing that struck me is just the
scale of the error bars around these
forecasts is huge. So yes, of course, we
can argue about what globalization and
demographics and corpor profitability
and labor versus profit share will do to
the earnings outlook and we can try our
best to have models for those and we
have certain error bars around them. But
the error bars around climate and also
AI I would say are two things that just
are very different from everything else
that introduces the sense of radical
forecast error in what we're doing and
really implies that people need to be
you know thinking about perhaps
diversification in a more radical way
because we have path error on 10 years
horizons that's much wider than it's
been historically.
Going back to AI for a second, obviously
this is really important not just for
the energy transition and the impact on
climate change, but also for the
economic outlook, the impact on
productivity and also of course for the
equity market where we've seen the big
tech giants just continue to dominate.
Is there a risk or would it be your base
case that AI basically just intensifies
I ex I guess existing market imbalances
where the big just get bigger and only a
select group of tech firms is kind of
favored and that presumably would
undermine productivity gains broad-based
productivity gains.
I think the biggest issue around trying
to forecast productivity gains is that
with any new technology that comes
along, it turns out to be really really
hard to forecast what the impact that
has on aggreate productivity and the
ability of the economic expression you
know in general and you know everyone
across the street to forecast
productivity has been really poor for a
long long time. So I guess we should
firstly approach productivity forecasts
with a degree of humility and certainly
shouldn't rely on huge productivity
gains as a justification for earnings
growth. Say that's the first thing I'd
say. Secondly is that it has to be put
in conjunction with downward forces on
growth um from the things we spoke about
earlier in terms of deglobization and
demographics etc. So yes, it seems
likely we do get a productivity
improvement from AI and the scale of it
is hotly debated. But the question is,
you know, is that enough to overcome
downward forces on growth from the
levels of growth that we've become used
to for the last kind of 30 or 40 years.
And the third element is to what extent
does a large productivity gain from AI
require significant uh displacement of
jobs? Now that's a very hotly debated
topic. We simply don't know the answer
to that yet. I mean on the one hand one
could point to 200 years of
technological advance and automation and
yet we have almost full employment.
There's no evidence to date that there's
been a structural trend increase in
unemployment through all the automation
we've seen uh since the birth of the
industrial revolution. You know, equally
at the same time, the jobs that seem
most at risk from AIdriven automation
are those in non-unionized sectors. And
that seems like a different kind of risk
than the one perhaps we've seen, you
know, through automation shifts the last
kind of 30 or 40 years. So I think the
heart of the macro aggregate you know
kind of question around AI is firstly
what's the quantum of the productivity
increase that we can expect you know
whether that is enough to offset these
downward force and growth elsewhere and
if you are very bullish on the outlook
for AIdriven productivity growth do you
necessarily have to bearish in terms of
the job outlook and that's a very much
an open question at the moment
>> I have just one more question and it's a
personal one if you don't mind, but I
know you you kind of publicly declared
that you're no longer a quant, which is
kind of funny because I kind of imagine
the equivalent of the office scene where
Michael stands up and shouts out, "I
declare bankruptcy." I kind of imagine
Indigo at the office of Alliance
Bernstein shouting, "I am no longer a
quant." But anyway, what does all of
this mean? This sort of big shift mean
for systematic investing that basically
relies on, you know, back testing reams
and reams of historic data.
>> Yeah. So I I think there is a case made
that the bigger structural level that
we've been in a certain economic
environment for 30 or 40 years and the
forces that drove that you know have run
their course or going into reverse and
therefore some of the rules of thumb
that have existed in for a long time
aren't going to work in the same way.
Now that does not mean that systematic
investing um suddenly stops working
because obviously there are firstly a
host of processes that operate over
shorter time horizons that don't need to
take into account these huge slowmoving
structural forces. Secondly, it would be
you know almost absurd I think to reject
any kind of systematic quantitative
input given the advances in AI that are
taking place and assume that one can
sort of carry on working in the same
way. So it's not to kind of reject with
that kind of process at all, but it is I
think hard to say that the general
approaches that have worked are going to
carry on in the same way. Specifically
when it comes down to the really hard
questions around helping clients think
about kind of governance and back to
this question we spoke about at the
beginning which is actually what is the
real measure of risk that we care about.
you know is that the volatility of the
portfolio or is it uh a measure of
purchasing power and that's the kind of
deep governance question that I think is
very you know hard to attack with any
kind of systematic process almost
necessarily kind of sits outside of that
and so it's those kind of discussions
that we're spending a lot more of our
time on clients because we think those
is where some of the bigger shifts are
taking place indigo Frasier Jenkins at
Alliance Bernstein thank you so much for
coming on it had been too long it's
always interesting to talk to and read
your stuff appreciate you joining us on
our
>> Thank you very much for having me back
on the show. It's been huge fun. Thank
you.
>> Thanks, Nico.
[Music]
>> Tracy, I always really like talking to
Indigo. It'd been too long and I think
he's probably one of the best out there.
you know, a lot of people try to
synthesize big picture ideas and, you
know, must be a lot of fun like going
around the world and talking to clients
and talking about big ideas. I think
he's like one of the best at it and I
think uh he's very cogent and takes that
process very seriously.
>> He does. I do imagine you must get the
same questions from clients over and
>> that's so valuable, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, I guess it allows you to
weigh what's the biggest concern for
people, but I just wonder I mean I guess
you give a sort of set response each
time you hear it. I don't know. or maybe
you refine your arguments as you go
along. I got to say, speaking of
arguments, you mentioned that this book
is from Indigo is publicly available. We
should put a link in the show notes um
or something to it so everyone can read
it alongside this episode.
>> The amount of data and interesting
charts in there, it's certainly well
worth anyone approing. So, we will
definitely make sure that we find a way
to point people to that. So I'm really
interested in this question of and on
the dollar specifically about the
sensitivity of the dollar to risk right
because for years the view is something
bad happens or something new happens or
something people get anxious in the
flight to dollars and I still think you
see that to some extent but it
definitely seems true. I mean, you know,
you see this recovery in a lot of assets
since early April. We haven't seen the
dollar. And I think you have these
moments now where you have a sort of
quote risk event unquote and there is no
flight to the dollar. It's a flight to
gold or something else,
>> right? And the Fed example is well, it's
a really good example. The two things I
kind of took away from that conversation
are even if we're talking about a sea
shift in what's happening in the world
and how that translates into markets,
>> it doesn't mean it's all going to happen
at once, right? This can be a very very
slowm moving thing. And I I guess I'm
going to use the old tanker cliche,
right? Like if you're in a speedboat,
you can turn it very quickly, but if
you're talking about these huge huge
structural changes, it's more of a
tanker and it takes some time. And then
the second thing is I think what is
actually different about this moment and
Indigo talked about it at the beginning
is just the confluence of major changes
that seem to be happening. It's not just
death of the dollar potentially. It's
also death of the dollar plus
declobalization plus AI plus population
growth and all of that. Now, I've been
thinking about this and it's a little
bit tangential to what we've been
talking about specifically, but there's
obviously so many changes. But even if
you just take one, and one that's been
on my mind lately is self-driving cars.
Even if there was nothing else happening
technologically in the entire world, I
think you could make the argument that
self-driving cars, for example, will
massively restructure urban landscapes.
Right? The way that we arrange cities
and suburbs and exerbs has the potential
to change massively if people don't have
to drive anymore. And this is just one
thing. It actually doesn't really even
get talked about that much. But if you
actually follow follow through the
implications, it's actually big. But we
there are so many things happening right
now. That's just one minor one that
doesn't even get that much attention.
But add in self-driving cars. Add in AI
and the effect that that has on
disrupting the white collar workforce in
some way. Add on the rise of sort of
domestic political volatility and the
attacks on the Fed and so forth. Add on
the fact there are multiple wars going
on, etc. uh add on, you know, the fact
that birth rates are collapsing.
>> This is a very long list, Joe.
>> Well, this is a lot going on. There's a
lot going on. And each one of these has
the potential to be and they're all
real.
>> I think you need to travel around the
world talking to clients about how
self-driving cars are going to impact
urban planning.
>> I'd love to. You know what I think we
should do? We should go around the world
and do live oddlots events, but we don't
have to ask any other question. We just
get to hear what everyone else is
interested in.
>> They're the clients basically. No, no,
we let the client, we let the listeners,
you know, like we don't we just What do
you guys want to hear about a listen?
Let's go on a listening tour.
>> We should do that. Yeah,
>> I would love that. That would be a nice
>> Yeah, let's do a listening tour.
>> All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Check out Indigo
Frasier Jenkins's book. You can find it
at the Alliance Bernstein website. You
can search that. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman, Dash O
Bennett at Dashbot, and Kellbrooks at
Kellbrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes, and you can chat about all
of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you want us
to go on a listening tour of the world,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.